Feat: Custom plugin management in Konnect (#6164)
Kong/docs.konghq.com: app/konnect/gateway-manager/plugins/update-custom-plugin.md

---
title: Editing or deleting a custom plugin's schema
content_type: how-to
---

The workflow for updating an in-use custom plugin depends on whether you need to update the schema:

* **No change to plugin schema:** Editing a custom plugin's logic **without** any change in 
schema doesn't cause the control plane to go out of sync with the data planes. 

  In this situation, you only need to make sure that each data plane node has the correct logic. 
  The schema on the control plane doesn't need to be updated.

* **Changes to plugin schema:** If the schema needs to change, you must update both the schema in 
{{site.konnect_short_name}} and the plugin code itself on each data plane node.

There is no versioning for custom plugins. If you need to version a schema 

> (that is, maintain two or more similar copies of a custom plugin), upload it as a new custom plugin.

Reviewer: We might need to clarify that all custom plugin schemas need a unique name in Konnect...

---

> title: Editing or deleting a custom plugin's schema

Reviewer 2: This section is about editing or deleting a schema, but guidance is provided only for the editing part. Do we intend to also add something specifically about deletion? For example, schemas cannot be deleted if currently in use.

Author: By "in use", do you mean that there's a plugin instance configured? So something like "Before deleting a custom plugin schema, make sure to remove all configured instances of the plugin from the control plane."

Anything else you can think of? The other thing that comes to mind is what order you want to delete things in, and what happens if you just delete the control plane side (or just the data plane side). 
- my guess is data plane first then control plane, or the order doesn't matter
- if you just delete the schema from the control plane, does the plugin keep functioning on the data plane, but without the ability to be updated?
- deleting it from a data plane seems like it won't break anything - same as when you first upload a schema to konnect and have nothing on the DPs

Reviewer 2: > By "in use", do you mean that there's a plugin instance configured? So something like "Before deleting a custom plugin schema, make sure to remove all configured instances of the plugin from the control plane."

Yes, I think that would be enough.

> Anything else you can think of? The other thing that comes to mind is what order you want to delete things in, and what happens if you just delete the control plane side (or just the data plane side).

The key point is whether the control plane has or hasn't a custom plugin configured:
- if the schema is removed in the DP while the plugin is still configured in the CP, then when a payload is sent to the DP it will complain about the schema is now unknown
- if no custom plugins exist on the CP, then both the CP and DP are free to remove the schema in whatever order

Makes sense?

content_type: how-to
---

The workflow for updating an in-use custom plugin depends on whether you need to update the schema:

> * **No change to plugin schema:** Editing a custom plugin's logic **without** any change in 
> schema doesn't cause the control plane to go out of sync with the data planes. 
> 
>   In this situation, you only need to make sure that each data plane node has the correct logic. 
>   The schema on the control plane doesn't need to be updated.
> 
> * **Changes to plugin schema:** If the schema needs to change, you must update both the schema in 
> {{site.konnect_short_name}} and the plugin code itself on each data plane node.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* **No change to plugin schema:** Editing a custom plugin's logic **without** altering its
schema won't cause the control plane to go out of sync with the data planes. 

  In this situation, you only need to make sure that each data plane node has the correct logic. 
  The schema on the control plane doesn't need to be updated.

* **Changes to plugin schema:** If there are changes required in the plugin schema, you must update both the schema in {{site.konnect_short_name}} and the plugin code itself on each data plane node.
```

> There is no versioning for custom plugins. 
> If you need to version a schema (that is, maintain two or more similar copies of a custom plugin), upload it as a new custom plugin with a unique name. 
> For example, if your original plugin is named `delay`, you would have to name the copy 
> something else, such as `delay-v2`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There is no built-in versioning for custom plugins. 
If you need to version a schema (that is, maintain two or more similar copies of a custom plugin), upload it as a new custom plugin with and incorporate a version identifier. 
For example, if your original plugin is named `delay`, you can name the new version `delay-v2`.
```

## Updating a custom plugin

### How the {{site.konnect_short_name}} platform reads configuration

When a schema is updated in {{site.konnect_short_name}}, the {{site.konnect_short_name}} 
platform doesn't trigger payload reconciliation automatically.

> This means that if you don't make any configuration changes, such as adding, 

Author: To understand this section, you have to understand that a schema and a plugin config object are two different things:
* A schema adds a tile to Konnect. You can change that schema, but changing that alone doesn't trigger any payloads to the data plane nodes.
* A plugin configuration is an individual instance, or entity. That's when you click on the new tile and configure a plugin. If you do that, the payload is sent.

modifying, or deleting a {{site.base_gateway}} entity, the data plane nodes won't receive a
payload update.

When pushing changes to the control plane, the payload reconciliation only affects 
data plane nodes if an instance of the plugin that uses the updated schema has its configuration 

> changed.

Author: A schema change and a config changes are both control plane changes. A schema change alone doesn't trigger anything; a config change does.

Since plugin configurations are stored as JSON blobs, a schema change alone doesn't impact the 

> plugin configuration. However, if the plugin itself is updated, the new schema affects how 

Author: this means an instance of the plugin.

the new plugin configuration is represented.

### Custom plugin update path

When you need to make plugin changes, we recommend updating the schema in 
{{site.konnect_short_name}} first, and then on the data plane nodes:

> 1. Start a migration window.

Author: This is outside of Kong's control. It's a process step - ie, if you're a Kong admin, to be safe, you would start a migration/maintenance window so that no config changes are made in that time. We can't tell them how to do it.

> 1. Update plugin schema in {{site.konnect_short_name}}.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Update the plugin schema in {{site.konnect_short_name}}.  
```

> 1. (Optional) Update configuration for existing plugin instances.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. (Optional) Update the configuration for existing plugin instances.
```

    Based on the nature of the schema updates, you might need this optional step 
    after updating the schema in {{site.konnect_short_name}} to make sure that any
    existing plugin entities are updated before the schemas are 
    changed in the data plane nodes.

> 1. Update plugin schema on each data plane node.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Update the plugin schema on each data plane node.
```

1. Stop the migration window.

{:.important}
> **Important**: In cases where a breaking change is made to the schema, we **do not** 
recommend updating data plane nodes first. 
The change will affect each data plane node as soon as the node receives its first payload. 
This will happen even if there are no changes in the control plane for existing or new plugins 
using the updated schema. 

See the following table for a comparison of possible changes and upgrade paths, in the case of 
a configuration parameter change in a custom plugin's schema:

| | Required Default | Required Non-default | Non-required Default | Non-required Non-default |
|--|--|--|--|--|
| Add | ✅ | ⏸️ | ✅ | ✅ |
| Remove | ⏸️ | ❌ | ⏸️ | ⏸️ |

> | Type Change | ❌ | ❌ | ❌ | ❌ |

Reviewer 3: The icons on this chart are throwing me off. Instead of ⏸️ maybe we could use ⚠️? 

I do wonder if there is a better way to express this concept without the icons, maybe with words?

{:.note .no-icon}
> **Legend:**
* ✅ Happy path (1 → 2 → 4 → 5)
* ⏸️ Semi-happy path (1 → 2 → 3 → 4 → 5)
* ❌ Unhappy path (1 → 2 → DP Error → 4 → 5)
> <br><br>
> **Note:** Unhappy paths don’t break existing proxy functionality, but they do cause temporary 
`Out of Sync` states until both the configured plugins and the data plane nodes are updated with 
the new schemas.

#### Adding or deleting fields

> If new fields in a schema don't have default values and aren't required, a payload update won't break data plane payload validation. This means that even if new plugins are added or existing ones are updated, the data plane remains in sync because null fields are ignored.

Reviewer 4: Is this first part saying "if you aren't updating the default values or required fields in a schema, data plane payload validation won't break"?

> Here's an example of a non-breaking change to a schema:

Reviewer 4: Not sure if we need the example because I'm not sure which values are default or required because I'm unfamiliar with this plugin. Maybe you could add a link to the plugin doc if you'd like to keep the example so people know which values are default/required?

Author: You don't need to be familiar with the plugin, you just need to see that no defaults or required attributes are set in the example. I added some explanation to the example intro text to point out what to look at.

```lua
{ 
    new_ttl = {
        type = "integer",
        gt = 0,
    }
},
{ 
    new_response_header = typedefs.header_name 
},
```

> Similar to adding fields, when not-required fields are deleted, it doesn't break the data plane -- even when a plugin is created or updated.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Similar to adding fields, when not-required fields are deleted, it doesn't break the data plane— even when a plugin is created or updated.
```

The data plane will only raise an error when a required field is removed and a payload update is triggered:

```sh
2023/09/01 07:14:26 [error] 2308#0: *160 [lua] data_plane.lua:244: [clustering] unable to update running config: bad config received from control plane in 'plugins':
  - in entry 1 of 'plugins':
    in 'config':
      in 'ttl': required field missing, context: ngx.timer
```

## Make changes to custom plugin schemas

To make any changes to a custom plugin schema, you need to access the **Add Plugin** page in 
Gateway Manager, or use the API:

{% navtabs %}
{% navtab Konnect UI %}

1. From the **Gateway Manager**, open a control plane.
1. Open **Plugins** from the side navigation, then click **Add Plugin**.
1. Open the **Custom Plugins** tab.
1. On the tile for your custom plugin click the action menu in the top right corner of the tile, then select **Edit** or **Delete**. Make your changes and save.

{% endnavtab %}
{% navtab Konnect API %}

```sh
curl -i -X PUT \
  https://{region}.api.konghq.com/v2/control-planes/{controlPlaneId}/core-entities/plugin-schemas/{customPluginName} \
  --data "lua_schema=@example-schema.lua"

> ```

Author: Note to self to add a delete request

upload it as a new custom plugin and add a version identifier to the name.
For example, if your original plugin is named `delay`, you can name the new version `delay-v2`.

## Updating a custom plugin

### How the {{site.konnect_short_name}} platform reads configuration

When a schema file is updated in {{site.konnect_short_name}}, the {{site.konnect_short_name}} 
platform doesn't trigger payload reconciliation automatically.

This means that if you **don't** make any configuration changes in the control plane, such as adding, 
modifying, or deleting a {{site.base_gateway}} entity, the data plane nodes won't receive a
payload update, and won't use the updated schema.

When pushing changes to the control plane, the payload reconciliation only affects 
data plane nodes if an instance of the plugin that uses the updated schema has its 
configuration changed.

Since plugin configurations are stored as JSON blobs, a schema change alone doesn't impact the 
plugin configuration. However, if an instance of this plugin is also updated, the new schema affects how 
any new plugin configuration is represented.

In summary:

> * Uploading a custom plugin schema adds a new configurable object to the {{site.konnect_short_name}} plugin hub, 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Uploading a custom plugin schema adds a new configurable object to the {{site.konnect_short_name}} Plugin Hub, 
```

both as a tile in the UI, and an API endpoint.

>   You can change that schema, but changing the schema alone doesn't trigger any payloads to the data plane nodes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 * Modifying the schema itself does not trigger payload updates to data plane nodes.
```
I think you meant this bullet.

1. Start a migration/maintenance window.
1. Update the plugin schema in {{site.konnect_short_name}}.  
1. (Optional) Update the configuration for existing plugin instances.

    Based on the nature of the schema updates, you might need this optional step 
    after updating the schema in {{site.konnect_short_name}} to make sure that any
    existing plugin entities are updated before the schemas are 
    changed in the data plane nodes.

1. Update the plugin schema on each data plane node.
1. Stop the migration/maintenance window.

{:.important}
> **Important**: In cases where a breaking change is made to the schema, we **do not** 
recommend updating data plane nodes first. 
The change will affect each data plane node as soon as the node receives its first payload. 
This will happen even if there are no changes in the control plane for existing or new plugins 
using the updated schema. 

See the following table for a comparison of possible changes and upgrade paths, in the case of 
a configuration parameter change in a custom plugin's schema.

**Legend:**

Based on the steps defined above and your specific use case, you have to take one of 
the following paths:

> * Short: Follow steps 1 → 2 → 4 → 5, skipping step 3.
> * Long: Follow steps 1 → 2 → 3 → 4 → 5
> * CP/DP sync required: 1 → 2 → Optionally 3, if the updated parameter is in use → 4 → 5

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Short path: Follow steps 1 → 2 → 4 → 5, skipping step 3.
* Long path: Follow steps 1 → 2 → 3 → 4 → 5
* CP/DP sync required: 1 → 2 → Optionally 3, if the updated parameter is in use → 4 → 5
```

Ignore this if it doesn't feel right. Otherwise lgtm

| | Required Default | Required Non-default | Non-required Default | Non-required Non-default |
|--|--|--|--|--|
| Configuration parameter added | Short | Long | Short| Short |
| Configuration parameter removed | Long | CP/DP sync required | Long | Long |
| Configuration parameter's data type changed | CP/DP sync required | CP/DP sync required | CP/DP sync required | CP/DP sync required |

{:.note}

> > **Note:** If the path requires sync, that means the change doesn't break existing proxy functionality, 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> **Note:** If the path requires a sync, that means the change doesn't disrupt existing proxy functionality, 
```
syncing maybe?

Reviewer 3: You can keep the break here.
